---
title: Creating accessible links
summary: Learn to create accessible links, in documents, websites and other digital media platforms that are clear, understandable and perceivable to users
author: dlee
date: 2022-10-14
tags:
  - Links
  - Best practice
---

## Links intro

Links are arguably the most important feature of the web, along with content itself. Text is the content, but we reach that content by clicking a link, which navigates to a new page or site, so it makes perfect sense that our links should be as accessible as possible, so everybody can access content in a way that works for them.

There are intentionally some not so good examples on this page, they are there for comparison and educational purposes

## Disambiguation

it's always important to discuss the pet hate of every accessibility professional ever, the links vs buttons battle. A huge part of being an accessibility professional is saying "This link should be a button" or "this button should be a link" until you retire.

Buttons and links are inherently different, it's as simple as "a link goes somewhere, a button does something". A button can be activated with both the <kbd>Space</kbd> and <kbd>Return</kbd> whereas a link can only be activated with <kbd>return</kbd> for keyboard users.

When screen reader or keyboard users encounter a button, they have 2 primary expectations:

* It will do something (the button's label should make it clear what that is)
* It will do that thing if they press <kbd>Space</kbd> or <kbd>Return</kbd>

Conversely, if they encounter a link, they expect it will navigate to a new page, new site or to a section on the current page.

This is not to say links cannot look like buttons, this is solely about using the right tool for the job, so the behaviour meets user expectations.

## Links Dos and Don'ts

### The Don'ts

1. Don't display links as the actual web address (URL), as it sounds awful on a screen reader, hearing H, T, T, P, S, Colon, Forward slash, Forward slash, W, W, W, dot, Blog, forward slash, the blog name, Forward slash (you get the idea), also, not all URLs are human readable, sometimes webpages may have a URL that is similar to this: h<span>ttp</span>s://www.acme.co.uk/64egeyr8rb/86364ghhs/zasbbna, due to the way the page was generated by the system, they're difficult to understand for everybody
2. Don't set the visible link text to "here", "click here" or anything else that lacks context. Some users use assistive technologies which can bring up a list of links to navigate to and when those links have the readable text "here" or "click here", that makes it really difficult for them to understand where that link will go, more so if there are many of them, as this will impact voice input users, as they may say "Click here", hoping to read more about an interesting blog and end up reading the cookies policy, as their software couldn't guess which "here" they meant
3. Don't have links with the same text, that go to different pages or sites, links should be unique and clearly labelled
4. Make links visually distinctive, a great way of doing that is not removing the underline, because it doesn't go with the site's aesthetic. In certain situations it may be OK to remove the underlines, but even then, it should be visually obvious that they are interactive elements
5. Don't open links in a new tab if you can help it, as this can disorient users
6. Focus indicators, always provide strong focus indicators for interactive elements, keyboard users depend on these to know where they are

### The Dos

1. Structure part of the sentence as link text, so it makes sense in isolation, as an example "Hyperlinks - Wikipedia". This approach helps everybody, a screen reader user hears the link with enough context to understand the link's purpose, a user that reads the text of the link will understand, everybody benefits
2. Again, this is about using the existing text to provide context, "Read more about my links blog"
3. Be specific enough that link texts are unique, don't have 2 links that both have the visible link text as "Wikipedia", when they point to different pages, be specific "Wikipedia Hyperlinks" and "Wikipedia - Buttons (Computing)", each of those helps everybody understand the page their browser will navigate to, if they click it
4. We don't have underlines on our main site navigation, but we have multiple other ways of making them identifiable as links, the position, users would typically expect to find links in a site header, the labels are quite self-explanatory and then we use semi-bold font, in a purple colour that has a good contrast against both the background and body text. All other text links across the site make use of that underline, we even make it more prominent, by increasing its thickness in supporting browsers (this is what happens when I have artistic license)
5. Are new tabs really an issue? Some people prefer to open links in new tabs, so they never lose the original source page. Others prefer to stick to the one tab and navigate back to the original page using the browser's **back** button. We all have different preferences, and we should accommodate those preferences using the best tool at our disposal: providing choice. If we force everybody to open a link in a new tab, we remove that choice, we're expecting every user to like what we like and if they don't like it, there's nothing they can do about it. [We should only open links in a new tab when necessary (W3C)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G200.html). If you do have to do this, for say security reasons, inform a user ahead of time, perhaps include "opens in new tab" in the visible link text
6. If you don't like the default focus ring, there's a few things you should do before removing it:
   * Never do this `outline: none;`, do this instead: `outline: 3px dotted transparent;`, this ensures users of Windows High Contrast Mode definitely get a focus outline, as it ignores transparency
   * Create a strong visual focus indicator, borders, toggle underlines, invert background and foreground colours, ensure that whichever indicator you create, has a minimum contrast of 3:1 against the unfocused state
   * Check, check and check again, once you make it transparent, you need to ensure that the indicator you have created displays on every single interactive element, it can be easy to miss one, so it's important to find those before you disappoint your users
<h2 class="accordion accordion--large">Extra: tips for opening new tabs</h2>
<div class="accordion__panel accordion__panel--large">
<p>Do you like opening links in new tabs? If you do, these quick tips will allow you to do just that, whilst not forcing everybody else to open a link in a new tab. I've provided all of the techniques I know how of, to provide choice for as a wider range of user as possible, as I am aware that some may rely on visual aspects, some on mouse pointer precision, some on location and some may need more than one hand or a dragging action, there is also a keyboard only technique.</p>

### Using a mouse?
Here's 2 quick mouse ways to open any link in a new tab (there's actually a third, but it needs its own section).

Right click the link and choose Open in new tab from the context menu
Hold <kbd>CTRL</kbd> on Windows or <kbd>CMD</kbd> on Mac and left click the link

### Using a touchscreen?
Long press the link and choose **Open in new tab** from the context menu (works on Android and iOS)

On Safari on iOS long press gives you the option to **Open in Background**, which does open a link in a new tab, but it doesn't automatically open that tab, you'd need to tap it to make it the active tab. If this is a bit annoying, go to **Settings** > **Safari** and toggle the **Open New Tabs in Background** option, so it is off. Now when you long press, you get the **Open in new tab** option

### Using a keyboard?
When the link has keyboard focus Hold <kbd>CTRL</kbd> on Windows or <kbd>CMD</kbd> on Mac and press <kbd>Return</kbd>

### The third mouse way
Using your mouse in Chrome, Edge or Firefox you can left click on the link, keep that left button held down and drag the link to an empty space after the right-most tab in the browser, this can be the New Tab button (visually represented by a plus icon) or any empty space after it (to its right), there is always at least a small space after the last tab, now let go of the mouse button, the browser then opens that link in a new tab. In Safari on a Mac, you need to drag that link to the **New Tab** button (visually represented by a plus icon), dragging to an empty space does not work in Safari.
</div>